[1.18] Add workflow history signing documentation (#5082)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/workflow/workflow-history-signing.md

---
type: docs
title: "Workflow history signing"
linkTitle: "History signing"
weight: 9000
description: "Cryptographic tamper detection for workflow execution histories"
---

Dapr workflow history signing provides cryptographic tamper detection for
workflow execution histories. Every history event produced during a workflow's

> lifetime is signed using the sidecar's mTLS identity (X.509 SVID), creating an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lifetime is signed using the sidecar's mTLS identity (X.509 SPIFFE Verifiable Identity Document (SVID)), creating an
```

auditable chain of signatures that is verified each time the workflow state is
loaded.

## Overview

Workflows in Dapr execute as a series of deterministic replay steps. Each step
appends history events to the [actor state store]({{% ref "workflow-architecture.md" %}}). History signing ensures that those events have
not been modified, reordered, or removed after they were written.

> 

Reviewer: ### About SPIFFE Verifiable Identity Documents (SVIDs)

As a short overview, an SVID acts as a digital passports.

- The SPIFFE ID: Is embedded inside the X.509 certificate (typically in the URI Subject Alternative Name, or SAN) is a specific identifier called a SPIFFE ID. It follows the format spiffe://trust-domain/workload-name.
- Cryptographic Proof: The SVID acts as a digital passport. The workload holds a corresponding private key used to sign communications.
- Trust Roots: Every SVID belongs to a specific "Trust Domain" and can be verified against a shared bundle of trusted Certificate Authority (CA) certificates.

Reviewer: Can we add this mini-SPIFFE overview?

When signing is active, Dapr:

1. Deterministically marshals each new history event.
2. Computes a SHA-256 digest over the batch of events.
3. Chains the new digest to the previous signature's digest.

> 4. Signs the combined input using the sidecar's [SPIFFE](https://spiffe.io/) X.509 private key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Signs the combined input using the sidecar's [SPIFFE](https://spiffe.io/) X.509 private key (SVID)
```

DER-encoded X.509 certificate chains used for signing, indexed by position.
When the sidecar's SVID rotates (for example, after a restart), a new certificate
entry is appended and subsequent signatures reference the new index.

## Prerequisites

History signing requires [mTLS]({{% ref "mtls.md" %}}) to be enabled. mTLS provides the SPIFFE
X.509 identity that is used as the signing key. Without mTLS, there is no
identity material available and signing is silently disabled.

In a standard Dapr deployment with the [Sentry service]({{% ref "security-concept.md" %}}), mTLS is enabled by default.

## Configuration

History signing is controlled by the `WorkflowHistorySigning` feature flag. It is
**disabled by default** and must be explicitly enabled.

### Enabling signing

To enable signing, set the feature flag to `true` in your Dapr configuration:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
  name: my-config
spec:
  features:
    - name: WorkflowHistorySigning
      enabled: true
```

### Conditions for signing to be active

Both conditions must be true for signing to occur:

| Condition | How to check |
|-----------|-------------|

> | mTLS is enabled | Sentry is running and the sidecar has a valid SVID |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| mTLS is enabled | Sentry service is running and the sidecar has a valid SVID |
```

| `WorkflowHistorySigning` is enabled | Feature flag is explicitly set to `true` |

If mTLS is disabled (no Sentry), the signer is `nil` regardless of the feature
flag, and signing does not occur.

{{% alert title="Important" color="warning" %}}

> **Signing is a one-way commitment.** Once a workflow is created with signing

Reviewer: Q: Seems like more guidance is needed here. How do you turn this feature on, on a cluster that has been running workflows for a while. Sounds like it will fail. It should not require a brand new deployment. Can you provide more input here and I suggest having a heading called "Activating workflow signing in an existing deployment"

Reviewer: Also I presume this cannot be done on a workflow type basis. All workflows of none?

Author: Added guidance on this- indeed it is an all or nothing commitment which should either be chosen on cluster creation, or good care given to rollout.

enabled, it must always run on signing-enabled hosts. Disabling signing on a
host that loads a previously signed workflow will cause the workflow to fail.
Similarly, enabling signing on a host that loads a previously unsigned workflow
will cause the workflow to fail. See [one-way commitment](#one-way-commitment)
for details.
{{% /alert %}}

## How signing works

### Signing new events

> After each workflow execution step, the orchestrator signs the newly appended

Reviewer: What orchestrator? I would stick to common terms, can you just say "Dapr"

history events.

{{< mermaid >}}
flowchart LR
    A["Marshal events<br/>(deterministic<br/>protobuf)"] --> B["Compute digests<br/>& chain to<br/>previous signature"] --> C["Sign with<br/>SVID private key"]
    C --> D["Persist signature<br/>+ certificate<br/>+ history events"]
{{< /mermaid >}}

The signing process works as follows:

1. **Deterministic marshaling**: Each new `HistoryEvent` is marshaled using
   protobuf's deterministic mode, producing stable bytes for the same message.
   These exact bytes are both signed and persisted to the state store.

2. **Events digest**: A SHA-256 hash is computed over the batch of marshaled
   events, with each event length-prefixed (big-endian uint64) to prevent
   concatenation ambiguity.

3. **Chain linkage**: The SHA-256 digest of the previous `HistorySignature`
   protobuf message is computed. The root signature (first in the chain) has
   no previous digest.

4. **Signature input**: The final signing input is
   `SHA-256(previousSignatureDigest || eventsDigest)`.

5. **Cryptographic signing**: The input is signed using the sidecar's SPIFFE

>    X.509 private key. Supported key types are Ed25519, ECDSA P-256, and RSA.

Reviewer: Is this user definable? Why do I care about the key types, can I change this?

Author: Updated the verbiage as the user doesn't choose, this is just informational.

    K -->|Wrong app| M
{{< /mermaid >}}

The verification steps for each signature in the chain are:

| Step | Check | Detects |
|------|-------|---------|
| Chain linkage | `previousSignatureDigest` matches `SHA-256(previous signature)` | Reordered or inserted signatures |
| Contiguity | Event ranges are adjacent with no gaps | Missing signatures |
| Events digest | Recompute SHA-256 from raw stored bytes | Tampered, inserted, or deleted events |
| Cryptographic signature | Verify against public key from the signing certificate | Forged signatures |
| Certificate validity | Certificate was valid at the time of the last signed event | Expired or backdated certificates |
| Chain-of-trust | Certificate chains to a trusted Sentry CA root | Signing by untrusted identity |
| App identity | SPIFFE ID in certificate matches the workflow's owning app | Cross-app signature forgery |
| Full coverage | Signatures cover every event from index 0 to the end | Partially unsigned history |

Verification uses the **raw bytes from the state store**, not re-marshaled
events. This ensures that any byte-level modification to persisted events is
detected.

### Inbox event validation

> When signing is enabled, the orchestrator validates inbox events before

Reviewer: What orchestrator? Dapr Workflow?

running under a different SPIFFE identity reporting back to the parent) need
their own cryptographic proof. Dapr emits an attestation on every cross-identity
completion and verifies it before the event enters the parent's inbox.

When a child workflow or activity completes, the executor attaches one of:

- `ChildCompletionAttestation` (on `ChildWorkflowInstanceCompleted` /
  `ChildWorkflowInstanceFailed`).
- `ActivityCompletionAttestation` (on `TaskCompleted` / `TaskFailed`).

Each attestation commits to a deterministic, language-independent payload:

| Field | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `parentInstanceId` + `parentTaskScheduledId` | Bind the proof to a specific invocation. Prevents cross-instance and cross-task replay. |
| `ioDigest` | SHA-256 over canonicalized, NFC-normalized input and output bytes. Identical across SDKs because the encoding is wire-format-independent and spec-versioned. |
| `signerCertDigest` | SHA-256 of the signer's DER-encoded X.509 chain. The chain itself travels alongside the attestation as a wire-only companion field. |
| `terminalStatus` | The workflow or activity outcome. For activities, the activity name is also committed. |

> On receipt, the parent's orchestrator runs `verifyInboxAttestation` before the

Reviewer: Orchestrator?

On ingestion, every chunk is verified independently:

| Check | Detects |
| --- | --- |
| Chain-of-trust to a Sentry trust anchor (reusing the per-orchestrator cache) | Forged or self-signed lineage |
| Leaf SPIFFE ID's app component matches the chunk's declared `appId` | Lineage produced by the wrong app |
| Per-chunk signature covers exactly the events in the chunk, contiguously | Splicing, gaps, or partial omission |
| Empty-with-signatures, missing-signatures, missing-certificate variants | Malformed chunks that would otherwise short-circuit verification |

Verified foreign certificates are absorbed into the same `ext-sigcert-NNNNNN`
table used by completion attestations, so downstream attestation lookups can
content-address them.

## What happens when verification fails

When signature verification fails, Dapr's response depends on whether the
workflow is still in custody of the executor, and on whether the failure is a
genuine tamper or a host configuration mismatch. In every case the original
history, signatures, and inbox are **never modified**; the untrusted data is
preserved for forensic analysis.

### Tamper of an in-flight workflow

> When the orchestrator actor loads a running workflow and detects tampering,

Reviewer: Orchestrator?

Dapr stops the executor from acting on forged input by appending a single
**unsigned terminal `ExecutionCompleted` event** marked with the well-known
error type `DAPR_WORKFLOW_HISTORY_TAMPERED`. This:

1. Halts further execution: the workflow is now in a terminal state and the
   executor will not replay or schedule new work on it.

> 2. Provides a stable, machine-matchable signal for clients

Reviewer: How should a user handle this event? Does this get surfaced as an exception?

Author: The workflow gets failed like any other workflow failure- the workflow goes into a terminal state. Handling is up to the user- this will happen due to a tampering event.

   inspect what was tampered with.

`LoadWorkflowState` recognises the tamper marker and bypasses signature
verification on subsequent loads, so the workflow can be read back and surfaced
as `FAILED` rather than failing to load entirely. Reminders for the workflow
and its activities are deleted to stop the engine from endlessly retrying a
compromised workflow.

The tamper-recovery path is scoped to workflows still in custody of the
executor. **Workflows that had already completed** before the tamper happened
are left untouched: there is nothing for the executor to do, and the
verification error is surfaced to readers (metadata queries) who are
responsible for detecting the tampering at read time.

### Configuration error

A mismatch between signed history and host signing configuration (signed
workflow loaded by a host without a signer, or unsigned workflow loaded by a
signing-enabled host) is reported as a distinct `ConfigurationError`, not as
tampering. The tamper-recovery path described above does not run against these
intact-but-unloadable workflows: their history is byte-identical to what was
written, so appending a tamper-terminal event would itself be a destructive

> edit. Fix the host configuration, or purge the workflow, to recover.

Reviewer: How to I see this configuration error?

Author: Added a section on this- gets put on the history, exposed via workflow get requests.

| Signing disabled (ConfigurationError) | A signed workflow was loaded by a non-signing host | "signed history but no signer is configured" |
| Signing enabled on unsigned (ConfigurationError) | An unsigned workflow was loaded by a signing host | "unsigned history events but signing is enabled" |

## One-way commitment

Signing is a permanent commitment per workflow. Once a workflow is created with
signing enabled, all subsequent operations on that workflow must occur on
signing-enabled hosts. There are two invariants:

1. **Signed workflow on non-signing host**: If a workflow has signed history but
   the current host does not have a signer configured (mTLS is off or the
   feature flag is disabled), loading the workflow fails. The workflow cannot
   execute and is effectively terminated.

2. **Unsigned workflow on signing host**: If a workflow was created without
   signing (the feature flag was off) and is later loaded by a signing-enabled
   host, loading fails. The unsigned history has no integrity proof and
   cannot be retroactively signed.

{{% alert title="Migration guidance" color="warning" %}}

> Before enabling signing cluster-wide, ensure all existing unsigned workflows

Reviewer: This answers my question , but is a long way down in the document. This should be nearer the top of the article the details of how it works last. In other words first Overview, second what a user needs to know to use the feature, third how it works details.

> have completed or been purged. Once signing is enabled, new workflows will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have completed or been purged. Once signing is enabled, new workflows are
```

> signed and existing unsigned workflows will fail to load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
signed and existing unsigned workflows fail to load.
```

{{% /alert %}}

> ## Certificate rotation

Reviewer: Same with this section. Move higher into the "What you need to know to use this" section.

> Dapr handles certificate rotation transparently. When the sidecar's SVID

Reviewer: When you say certificate rotation transparently, you are referring to the cert for signing, yes? 
Just do not want to confuse this with the cert for identity, which currently expires by default after a year. 

So what happen if the root cert expires, which happens a lot to new users after a year does this
1) Mean all signed workflow no longer load?
2) If I create a new root cert all signed workflow with the previous root cert no longer load?
3) How do I create a new root cert without messing up all my workflow loading? Does mean I really should provide my own cert with a company root authority to Sentry?

I that there needs to be some real distinct operation guidance here for orgs, added to the docs.

Author: Have expanded the section on this:

1. correct, when the root key changes.
2. correct
3. yes, special care needs to be taken for root changes

rotates (for example, after a restart where Sentry issues a new short-lived
certificate, or when the SVID naturally expires), the signing system:

1. Detects that the current certificate differs from the last entry in the
   certificate table.
2. Appends a new certificate entry to the table.
3. New signatures reference the new certificate index.

Previous signatures remain valid because they reference their original
certificate, which is still in the table and verifiable against the CA trust
anchors.

{{< mermaid >}}
gantt
    title Signature Certificate Usage Over Time
    dateFormat X
    axisFormat %s

    section Boot 1
    Sig 0 - Cert A : 0, 2
    Sig 1 - Cert A : 2, 4

    section Restart
    SVID rotates : milestone, 4, 0

    section Boot 2
    Sig 2 - Cert B : 4, 6
    Sig 3 - Cert B : 6, 8
{{< /mermaid >}}

> Both Cert A and Cert B chain to the same Sentry CA, so all signatures remain

Reviewer: But if the Sentry CA cert is rotated, you are toast! What to do to prevent this? We need a big warning flag here

valid.

In multi-replica deployments, each replica has its own private key and SVID

> certificate. When the workflow orchestrator migrates between replicas (for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
certificate. When the workflow runtime migrates between replicas (for
```

example, due to scaling or rebalancing), the new replica's certificate is
appended to the table. All certificates are validated as belonging to the same
app ID via SPIFFE identity binding.

{{% alert title="Important" color="warning" %}}
**Certificate rotation** (new leaf SVID, same CA root) works seamlessly.

> A full **CA rotation** (completely different root CA) will cause verification

Reviewer: Ah! Answered here. This will happen. How is this prevent, given the default root cert expires after 1 year, if you let Dapr deploy this? Presumably keep a copy of your root cert.

to fail for workflows signed under the old CA, because the old signing
certificates will not chain to the new trust anchors. This is by design: if
the trust root changes, previously signed data cannot be verified.
{{% /alert %}}

## State store layout

Workflow signing data is stored alongside the workflow state using the

> following key prefixes. All keys are scoped to the workflow instance's actor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
following key prefixes. All keys are scoped to the workflow instance's
```

suggest keeping actor implementation out of the description

| **Trust anchoring** | All signing certificates are verified against the Sentry CA trust bundle |
| **Inbox validation** | Activity and child workflow results are validated against scheduled operations in signed history, preventing injection of fake results |
| **Cross-identity attestation** | Child workflow and activity completions are cryptographically attested by the executing identity and verified by the parent before they enter the inbox |
| **Lineage integrity** | Forwarded `PropagatedHistoryChunk`s are individually signed and verified against the producing app's SPIFFE identity |
| **Immutable history** | Dapr never modifies the existing workflow history, signatures, or inbox; the only write on tamper detection is an unsigned terminal `ExecutionCompleted` event with error type `DAPR_WORKFLOW_HISTORY_TAMPERED` |
| **One-way commitment** | Signing cannot be disabled for signed workflows or enabled for unsigned workflows |

## Frequently asked questions

### Does signing add latency to workflow execution?

The signing operation (SHA-256 hashing and ECDSA/Ed25519 signing) is fast and

> adds negligible latency. The main cost is the additional state store writes for

Reviewer: So does it add latency due to the writes? Not sure you answered the question.

Author: Yes, however is negligible compared to the existing latency profile. Expanded

the signature and certificate entries, which are batched in the same
transactional write as the history events.

### What happens if I disable signing on a workflow that was previously signed?

The workflow **fails to load**. Signing is a [one-way commitment](#one-way-commitment):
once a workflow has signed history, it must always run on a signing-enabled
host. This prevents an attacker from disabling signing to bypass verification.

### Can I enable signing on workflows that were created without it?

**No.** Enabling signing on a host that loads unsigned workflow history causes a
verification error. The unsigned history has no integrity proof and cannot be
retroactively signed, because events written without signing could have been
tampered with. Ensure all unsigned workflows complete or are purged before
enabling signing cluster-wide.

### What happens during a Sentry CA rotation?

**Certificate rotation** (new leaf SVID, same CA root): works seamlessly.
Multiple certificates are stored in the certificate table and each signature
references its specific certificate. All certificates chain to the same CA.

> **CA rotation** (completely new root CA): verification fails for workflows

Reviewer: This answers my question. What should an org do to prevent this?
- Provide their own root cert?
- Given the default root cert from Sentry expires after one year, can they create a new one which is valid from this?
